[IMP] Email marketing: Analyze metrics reports (#10764)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/marketing/email_marketing/analyze_metrics.rst

desired metric.

Next, click the :icon:`fa-caret-down` :guilabel:`(down arrow)` to the right of the search bar to see
the list of filtering and grouping parameters.

:guilabel:`Filters`, located in the left column of the search options, can be used to keep only the
results that fit the filter. For example, selecting the :guilabel:`Bounced` filter only shows emails
that could not be delivered.

:guilabel:`Group By`, found in the middle column, is used to organize the results into groups, and
can be used with or without filters.

.. note::
  Setting multiple :guilabel:`Group By` options creates nested groups, according to which option
  is selected first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Mailing Lists`, followed by
  :guilabel:`Bounce`, in the :guilabel:`Group By` column, sorts all results *first* by the mailing
  list, *then* by whether an email was bounced.

  This can be verified by looking at the direction, and order, of the selections in the group tile
  that appears in the search bar.

.. example::
   A monthly newsletter has been sent out, and 6.9% of the sent emails were bounced.

   .. image:: analyze_metrics/newsletter-metrics.png
      :align: center

>       :alt: The metrics smart buttons of the newsletter.

Reviewer: Please correct me if I'm mistaken, but shouldn't the screenshot being used here show 6.9% in the 'Bounced' smart button?

>    To see what these bounced recipients have in common, the records are grouped using a custom group
>    targeting :guilabel:`Mailing Lists`, which groups all records by the mailing lists they are on.
>    The records are then filtered using a custom filter with the rule `Created on >= 07/01/2024
>    00:00:00`, when the mailing list was last checked. This filter only includes recipients
>    that have been created on or after July 1st, 2024, in the report.

Reviewer: I think this example might benefit from some clarification.

When I click on 'Bounced' to follow this example, and I click 'Add Custom Group', it reveals a long list of options, but 'Mailing Lists' isn't one of them. Perhaps that's because, on the runbot I'm using for the review, there is only one contact appearing on the 'Bounced' page, making such a grouping impossible. Either way, I'd suggest confirming the presence of this during your revisions.

And, I'd suggest either ref-linking to a doc about how to create a custom filter, or providing the reader with a brief breakdown of how to create a custom filter, so they can be armed with that knowledge, should they want to create one of their own.
```suggestion
   To see what these bounced recipients have in common, the records are grouped using a custom group
   targeting :guilabel:`Mailing Lists`, which groups all records by the mailing lists they are on.
   The records are then filtered using a custom filter with the rule `Created on >= 07/01/2024
   00:00:00`, when the mailing list was last checked. This filter only includes recipients
   that have been created on, or after, July 1st, 2024, in the report.
```

      .. image:: analyze_metrics/metrics-filter.png
         :align: center
         :alt: The custom filter creation form.

>    Using these search terms, it can be seen that all the recipients with bounced emails were added

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Using these search configurations, it can be seen that all the recipients with bounced emails were added
```
optional rewording

>    after the list was last checked. Looking closer at the domains, it can be seen that each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   after the list was last checked. Looking closer at the domains, it is evident that each
```
optional rewording

   recipient has a malformed email domain (i.e: @yaoo.com instead of @yahoo.com), likely due to a
   manual entry error while updating the database.

   .. image:: analyze_metrics/malformed-addresses.png
      :align: center
      :alt: A list of bounced email addresses with malformed email domains.

.. _email-marketing/deliverability-issues:

Mass mailing analysis
=====================

It is also possible to analyze the success between mailing campaigns by creating a *Mass Mailing

> Analysis report*. To begin, navigate to :menuselection:`Email Marketing app --> Reporting --> Mass

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analysis* report. To begin, navigate to :menuselection:`Email Marketing app --> Reporting --> Mass
```

Mailing Analysis`.

A dashboard appears displaying a bar chart containing each mailing campaign. By default, *Sent* is
selected, displaying the number of sent records on the y-axis. To change the measure, click the

> :guilabel:`Measures` button and select the desired measure from the drop-down menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Measures` button, and select the desired measure from the drop-down menu.
```

  authentication is trusted by email providers. View the
  :ref:`email-marketing/deliverability-issues` section for more information.

.. tip::
   Click on the respective smart buttons to see the recipient records for each metric.

.. _email_marketing/create_reports:

Create metrics reports
======================

Individual metrics can be analyzed by creating a report. To begin, click on the smart button of the
desired metric.

Next, click the :icon:`fa-caret-down` :guilabel:`(down arrow)` to the right of the search bar to see
a drop-down menu of filtering and grouping parameters.

:guilabel:`Filters`, located in the left column of the search options, can be used to keep only the
results that fit the filter. For example, selecting the *Bounced* filter only shows emails
that could not be delivered.

:guilabel:`Group By`, found in the middle column, is used to organize the results into groups, and
can be used with or without filters.

.. note::
  Setting multiple :guilabel:`Group By` options creates nested groups, according to which option
  is selected first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Mailing Lists`, followed by

>   *Bounce*, in the :guilabel:`Group By` column, sorts all results *first* by the mailing

Reviewer 2: *Bounce* does not appear to be a readily available Group By option, nor is it listed in the **Add Custom Group** menu. Is this actually a selectable Group By?
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/47715286-7968-412a-9730-c5ddc8e1446b)

Reviewer 2: A more relevant Group By nesting example here, I'd argue, would be something like **Sent Period** > **Winner Selection** to see Email Marketing campaign "winners" over a specific time frame. 

**Sent Period** > **Responsible** would be another good one to see who on the team is sending in volume or quality (team performance check)

  list, *then* by whether an email was bounced.

  This can be verified by looking at the direction, and order, of the selections in the group tile
  that appears in the search bar after the selections are made.

> .. example::

Reviewer 2: Good example 👍

   Using these configurations, it is evident that all the recipients with bounced emails were added
   after the list was last checked. Looking closer at the domains, it can be seen that each
   recipient has a malformed email domain (i.e: @yaoo.com instead of @yahoo.com), likely due to a
   manual entry error while updating the database.

   .. image:: analyze_metrics/malformed-addresses.png
      :align: center
      :alt: A list of bounced email addresses with malformed email domains.

.. seealso::
  View :doc:`../../essentials/search` for more information about making custom groups and
  filters.

.. _email-marketing/deliverability-issues:

Mass mailing analysis
=====================

It is also possible to analyze the success between mailing campaigns by creating a *Mass Mailing
Analysis* report. To begin, navigate to :menuselection:`Email Marketing app --> Reporting --> Mass
Mailing Analysis`.

A dashboard appears displaying a bar chart containing each mailing campaign. By default, *Sent* is
selected, displaying the number of sent records on the y-axis. To change the measure, click the
:guilabel:`Measures` button, and select the desired measure from the drop-down menu.

> .. example::

Reviewer 2: GREAT example! 
Consider writing a tutorial just on this topic around open rate optimization 🤙

   or failing to :doc:`configure the proper DNS records
   <../../general/email_communication/email_domain>`.

Replied rate
------------

The percentage of recipients who responded to the email, against the total number of sent emails.

A high replied rate may indicate the email resonated with recipients, prompting them to take
action or provide feedback.

A low replied rate may suggest the message lacked relevance or did not contain a clear
call-to-action.

Clicked rate
------------

This represents the *Clicked through rate (CTR)*, which measures the
percentage of recipients who clicked on a link within the email, against the total number of sent
emails.

A high |CTR| may indicate the email content was relevant and appropriately targeted. Recipients
were motivated to click the links provided, and likely found the content engaging.

A low |CTR| may indicate issues with either the targeting, or the content itself. Recipients may
have been unmotivated by the calls-to-action, if there were any, or the message itself may have
been directed toward the wrong audience.

Received rate
-------------

> This rate measures the percentage of emails that were **successfully** delivered, against the total\
> number of sent emails.

Reviewer 3: Remove slash :)
```suggestion
This rate measures the percentage of emails that were **successfully** delivered, against the total
number of sent emails.
```

A low bounce rate may indicate that the mailing list used is up-to-date, and the sender
authentication is trusted by email providers. View the :ref:`email-marketing/deliverability-issues`
section for more information.

.. tip::
   Click on the respective smart buttons to see all the corresponding recipient records that are
   attributed to each metric. When these filtered records are in view, multiple types of reports can
   be run for further analysis.

.. _email_marketing/create_reports:

Create metrics reports
======================

Individual metrics can be analyzed by creating a report. To begin, click on the smart button of the
desired metric.

Next, click the :icon:`fa-caret-down` :guilabel:`(down arrow)` to the right of the search bar to see
a drop-down menu of filtering and grouping parameters.

:guilabel:`Filters`, located in the left column of the search options, can be used to keep only the
results that fit the filter. For example, selecting the *Bounced* filter only shows emails
that could not be delivered.

:guilabel:`Group By`, found in the middle column, is used to organize the results into groups, and
can be used with or without filters.

.. note::

>   Setting multiple :guilabel:`Group By` options creates nested groups, according to which option
>   is selected first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Sent Period`, followed by
>   :menuselection:`Add Custom Group -->`:guilabel:`Responsible`, in the :guilabel:`Group By` column,
>   sorts all results *first* by the sent period, *then* by the team member responsible. This is a
>   useful metric for analyzing who on the team is sending in volume or quantity over a set time
>   period.
> 
>   This can be verified by looking at the direction, and order, of the selections in the group tile
>   that appears in the search bar after the selections are made.

Reviewer 3: Indent entire text to align with the admonition, also fix menuselection :)
```suggestion
   Setting multiple :guilabel:`Group By` options creates nested groups, according to which option
   is selected first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Sent Period`, followed by
   :guilabel:`Add Custom Group --> Responsible`, in the :guilabel:`Group By` column, sorts all
   results *first* by the sent period, *then* by the team member responsible. This is a useful
   metric for analyzing who on the team is sending in volume or quantity over a set time period.

   This can be verified by looking at the direction, and order, of the selections in the group tile
   that appears in the search bar after the selections are made.
```

.. example::
   A monthly newsletter has been sent out, and 6.9% of the sent emails were bounced.

   .. image:: analyze_metrics/newsletter-metrics.png
      :align: center
      :alt: The metrics smart buttons of the newsletter.

   To see what these bounced recipients have in common, the records are grouped using a custom group
   targeting :guilabel:`Mailing Lists`, which groups all records by the mailing lists they are on.
   The records are then filtered using a custom filter with the rule `Created on >= 07/01/2024

>    00:00:00`, when the mailing list was last checked. This filter only includes recipients
>    that have been created on, or after, July 1st, 2024, in the report.

Reviewer 3: Just double checking this statement, as it wasnt clear to me in this context:
> "when the mailing list was last checked."

```suggestion
   00:00:00`, to filter by when the mailing list was last checked. This filter only includes
   recipients that have been created on, or after, July 1st, 2024, in the report.
```

>       .. image:: analyze_metrics/metrics-filter.png
>          :align: center
>          :alt: The custom filter creation form.

Reviewer 3: Scoot image back to align with the admonition
```suggestion
   .. image:: analyze_metrics/metrics-filter.png
      :align: center
      :alt: The custom filter creation form.
```

   Using these configurations, it is evident that all the recipients with bounced emails were added
   after the list was last checked. Looking closer at the domains, it is evident that each
   recipient has a malformed email domain (i.e: @yaoo.com instead of @yahoo.com), likely due to a
   manual entry error while updating the database.

   .. image:: analyze_metrics/malformed-addresses.png
      :align: center
      :alt: A list of bounced email addresses with malformed email domains.

.. seealso::

>   View :doc:`../../essentials/search` for more information about making custom groups and
>   filters.

Reviewer 3: Indent text again :)
```suggestion
   View :doc:`../../essentials/search` for more information about making custom groups and
   filters.
```

.. _email-marketing/deliverability-issues:

Mass mailing analysis
=====================

It is also possible to analyze the success between mailing campaigns by creating a *Mass Mailing
Analysis* report. To begin, navigate to :menuselection:`Email Marketing app --> Reporting --> Mass
Mailing Analysis`.

> A dashboard appears displaying a bar chart containing each mailing campaign. By default, *Sent* is
> selected, displaying the number of sent records on the y-axis. To change the measure, click the
> :guilabel:`Measures` button, and select the desired measure from the drop-down menu.

Reviewer 3: This text can be seen on the current UI, so please use a guilabel :)
```suggestion
A dashboard appears displaying a bar chart containing each mailing campaign. By default,
:guilabel:`Sent` is selected, displaying the number of sent records on the y-axis. To change the
measure, click the :guilabel:`Measures` button, and select the desired measure from the drop-down
menu.
```

.. example::
   The following chart displays the number of opened emails from two different mass mailings.

>    In this view, it can be seen that the first mass mailing led to a higher opening rate than the
>    second. Because a lower opening rate can sometimes be attributed to a subject line that failed to
>    capture readers' attention, the subject line of each mass mailing can be a good place to begin
>    looking.

Reviewer 3: Maintain consistent terminology :)
```suggestion
   In this view, it can be seen that the first mass mailing led to a higher opened rate than the
   second. Because a lower opened rate can sometimes be attributed to a subject line that failed to
   capture readers' attention, the subject line of each mass mailing can be a good place to begin
   looking.
```
